[Common] Clarify Attribute support based on stable wire protocol definition of Attributes #2581 (#2620)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/common/README.md

  - A primitive type: string, boolean, double precision floating point (IEEE 754-1985) or signed 64 bit integer.
  - An array of primitive type values. The array MUST be homogeneous,
    i.e., it MUST NOT contain values of different types.

>   - It MAY also contain another valid Attribute value resulting in `nested` Attributes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **For the [Logs](../logs) signal only:** It MAY also contain another valid Attribute value resulting in `nested` Attributes
```
This would document the status quo and thus resolve the current inconsistency in the spec pointed out in https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/2581.
Adding support for nested attributes also for other signals should be proposed and discussed separately. This would be a breaking change as trace and metrics consumers do not have to expect such data as per OTel Traces and Metrics `v1.x`.

Author: Reworked to relocate and highlight that this is only support by Logs (and ProtoBuf)

Reviewer: I think it would be better to indicate right here in the list that this only applies to logs as the "See ..." below is easy to overlook. WDYT?

Author: Understanding the concern about it being missed, but I'd still prefer to link out rather than repeat.

I'll move the "see" to the beginning.

  - A primitive type: string, boolean, double precision floating point (IEEE 754-1985) or signed 64 bit integer.
  - An array of primitive type values. The array MUST be homogeneous,
    i.e., it MUST NOT contain values of different types.

>   - When specified via semantic conventions it MAY (see [Nested Attributes](#nested-attributes))

Reviewer 2: This is not a clarification but allows a new feature.

Author: This line explicitly calls out to see the Nested Attribute support which clarifies that this is NOT automatically supported by this line but must be explicitly defined by the semantic conventions (and is supported by Logs).

Reviewer 2: But it allows semantic conventions to add them, as written now, doesn't it?

  - A primitive type: string, boolean, double precision floating point (IEEE 754-1985) or signed 64 bit integer.
  - An array of primitive type values. The array MUST be homogeneous,
    i.e., it MUST NOT contain values of different types.
  - It MAY (see [Nested Attribute Support](#nested-attribute-support)) also
    contain another valid Attribute value resulting in `nested` Attributes

>     and the referenced Attribute MUST not be recursive. i.e. The value of the

Reviewer 3: @MSNev  What if we say something like this:
"- In addition for LogRecord attributes [Nested Attributes] are supported."

This makes it clear that it only applies to LogRecords and it is clear that it does not change semantics of attributes of any other data types.

Author: Reworded

>     key-value pair will itself be a key-value pair.

Reviewer 4: It is unclear to me what impact this has on the API -- since you included this in a general Attribute specification, does that mean that you MAY pass nested attributes to a metric instrument?

Extending the generic Attribute definition has impact on all signals (and I suppose at least some SDKs share Attribute/Attributes classes/modules between signals); if you need to introduce nested attribute support in logs, then how about adding it directly to logs instead? Or introducing a separate "nested attribute collection" just for logs' sake.

Author: As per the existing released ProtoBuf definition someone CAN already construct and send nested attributes and they WILL be successfully transported. And depending on the receiver / backend this is something that needs to be handled, even if that handling strategy buy converting or dropping the values.

Additional, part of this clarification is driven by the fact that SDK's share Attribute/Attributes classes/modules, so that when the SDK's start implementing the Logs signal they WILL run into this confusion. Which would force them to create a situation where Attributes !== Attributes and therefore they will need to introduce additional mappings which is just additional complexity across the entire API surface rather than defining it as a "possibility" and therefore redirecting the required code changes to "handle" this situation to the relevant signal exported (protocol - i.e.. the point at which the Attributes are converted to the wire format).

So for Span and metrics the strategy would be that is already defined as per
> For protocols that do not natively support non-string values, non-string values SHOULD be represented as JSON-encoded strings. For example, the expression int64(100) will be encoded as 100, float64(1.5) will be encoded as 1.5, and an empty array of any type will be encoded as [].

And for Logs it would be supported

This then removes the need and complexity of having multiple Attribute definition.

Author: Reworded a little

both containing an array of strings to represent a mapping
`header_keys[i] -> header_values[i]`).

> `nested` Attribute support MAY be protocol, signal, language, SDK or Exporter
> specific as not all SDKs, exporters or backends support the storing or sending

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`nested` Attributes are only supported by the [Logs](../logs) signal.
Only certain protocols, languages, SDKs or Exporters support the storing or sending
```

both containing an array of strings to represent a mapping
`header_keys[i] -> header_values[i]`).

`nested` Attributes are also how consumers MAY provide custom attributes that
are domain specific and have no defined semantic conventions beyond the specific

> name used for the signal.

Reviewer: What's meant by "specific name"? The log attribute name (key)?

Author: "beyond the specific name used for the signal" is meant to call out that some signals (Logs) and more specifically Events will define a specific name to allow any Event to support passing user / application (domain) specific structure.

While vendors may also have their own (additional) semantic conventions which define their own domain specific "events"

Reviewer: I'm still confused by the sentence, sorry.
Consumers (processors/exporters/backends) don't provide any attributes, they consume them. Should it say producers (instrumentation/receivers) here?

> some signals (Logs) and more specifically Events will define a specific name to allow any Event to support passing user / application (domain) specific structure.

So that would be the attribute name then, right?

Author: > they consume them

That is the key point, and also where they should be handled.
When an exporter hits this situation it needs to handle it as it will occur either via Logs / events or some application developer passing in an or constructing their own exported / OTLP exporter (this has already occurred) as it won't be limited to just code produced by the OTel Sdk's.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps delete this paragraph. I don't think it helps to achieve what this PR wants to achieve.

- set a limit of unique attribute keys such that:
  - for each unique attribute key, addition of which would result in exceeding
    the limit, SDK MUST discard that key/value pair.
- set a limit on the supported depth of nested attributes:
  - when this limit is exceeded it MAY provide a configurable strategy for handling
    items beyond this limit which MAY include:
    - Dropping the excessive depth,
    - Replacing the value with a relevant token indicating values have been truncated,
    - Converted to a string representation, which MUST also comply with the value

>       length limits;

Reviewer: Having a configurable limit like this does not document the current status but would be a new feature and should be proposed in a separate issue and PR.

Author: Removed

* `AttributeCountLimit` (Default=128) - Maximum allowed attribute count per record;
* `AttributeValueLengthLimit` (Default=Infinity) - Maximum allowed attribute value length;

> * `AttributeNestedLengthLimit` (Default=10; if supported) - Maximum allowed number of nested attribute value;

Reviewer: Having a configurable limit like this does not document the current status but would be a new feature and should be proposed in a separate issue and PR.

at this time, as discussed in
[Metrics Attribute Limits](../metrics/sdk.md#attribute-limits).

### Nested Attributes

Only certain protocols, languages, SDKs or Exporter support the storing or sending
of a hierarchy of Attributes. When not supported those cases they SHOULD implement
a strategy to handle how nested Attributes are stored or transmitted, like using
a JSON-encoded string value as highlighted for protocols above. The depth of the
any resulting hierarchy SHOULD be limited and MUST not include recursive references.

> While the at the ProtoBuf protocol level the [`AnyValue`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/main/opentelemetry/proto/common/v1/common.proto#L28-L67)

Reviewer: I hope this does not change again as it's a core message and considered stable but please use a permalink (you can just press `y` on your keyboard to have `main` replaced with the respective commit hash), just in case.

supports `nested` attributes via the `KeyValueList` at the specification level
this does not infer that `nested` attributes are or should be fully supported for
every protocol, signal, language, SDK or Exporter due to different environment,
runtime and storage concerns.

#### Nested Attribute Support

This section provides a single compliance lookup of current `nested` attribute
support as defined by the specification using the same annotations as defined
on the [Specification Compliance Matrix](../../spec-compliance-matrix.md).

This should be used as a guide only, when a specific area is not listed
it does not infer that `nested` attributes are or MUST be supported.

| Area                 | Optional  |
|----------------------|-----------|
| Span                 | -         |
| Metrics              | -         |
| Logs                 |           |
| ProtoBuf (AnyValue)  |           |

> 

Reviewer: I find this table confusing. To me it looks like "For Span and Metrics it is NOT optional and for Logs and ProtoBuf it is undefined whether it is optional".
How about this?
| Signal               | Supported |
|----------------------|-----------|
| Span                 | no        |
| Metrics              | no        |
| Logs                 | yes       |

I don't think it's necessary to mention again in the table that the protobuf AnyValue would support it.

Author: Changed to yes/no and removed ProtoBuf

at this time, as discussed in
[Metrics Attribute Limits](../metrics/sdk.md#attribute-limits).

### Nested Attributes

Only certain protocols, languages, SDKs or Exporter support the storing or sending
of a hierarchy of Attributes. When not supported those cases they SHOULD implement
a strategy to handle how nested Attributes are stored or transmitted, like using
a JSON-encoded string value as highlighted for protocols above. The depth of the

> any resulting hierarchy SHOULD be limited and MUST not include recursive references.

Reviewer 3: I would drop this. If above we say that LogRecords attribute can be nested then it is up to each languages to figure out how to support it.

The specifics of how to convert nested attribute values to non OTLP formats do not belong to this document. They should be in mapping-to-non-otlp.md.

Author: Moved to mapping-to-non-otlp.md

While the at the ProtoBuf protocol level the [`AnyValue`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/157bedf2d42bd2c2c9a35e355839a48f99ce06ee/opentelemetry/proto/common/v1/common.proto#L28-L67)
supports `nested` attributes via the `KeyValueList` at the specification level
this does not infer that `nested` attributes are or should be fully supported for
every protocol, signal, language, SDK or Exporter due to different environment,

> runtime and storage concerns.

Reviewer 3: Same here, I don't think the paragraph is necessary.

Author: Reworded

#### Nested Attribute Support

This section provides a single compliance lookup of current `nested` attribute
support.

This should be used as a guide only, when a specific area is not listed

> it does not infer that `nested` attributes are or MUST be supported.

Reviewer 3: I suggest to delete this and list all areas explicitly to make sure there is no misreading possible.

Author: Removed

> | Area                 | Optional  |
> |----------------------|-----------|
> | Span                 | no        |
> | Metrics              | no        |
> | Logs                 | yes       |

Reviewer 4: This table is kinda confusing, I am not sure what "optional = no" is supposed to mean in the context of spans/metrics.

Consider using the requirement keywords in the table instead

```suggestion
| Area                 | Nested attributes support |
|----------------------|---------------------------|
| Span                 | MUST NOT                  |
| Metrics              | MUST NOT                  |
| Logs                 | MAY                       |
```

Reviewer: I agree, to me this currently reads as "For Spans and Metrics it is not optional, i.e., a MUST requirement".

Author: Will update the "Optional" to "Supported"

> 

Author: Add scopes and resources as not supported

that individual attribute value being exported using a streaming wire protocol.
In such cases the enforcement of uniqueness will likely be the responsibility of
the recipient of this data.

An Attribute Collection does not infer a hierarchy or `nested` collection of
Attributes, it represents a single flat definition which MAY be represented
logically as an array, list, set or map as `nested` Attributes support is

> provided by the Attribute Value.

Reviewer 3: I do not quite understand what this intends to say.

Author: This is attempting to state that Attribute Collections does not mean nested attributes, when I first read this section (because I came from the Protobuf perspective) I "assumed" that a Collection meant nesting. So just attempting to clarify so it's clear so someone elses doesn't make the same assumption.

Author: Reworded a little as well
